docs/trouble-symgo-refine2.md, before:

# `symgo` Refinement 2: Troubleshooting the Analysis of `minigo`

This document details the troubleshooting process for fixing the `symgo` analysis of the `minigo` package, as outlined in `plan-symgo-refine2.md`.

## Initial Analysis (Correction)

The initial problem analysis was flawed. The root cause of the `find-orphans` e2e test timeout was not just a failure to resolve standard library symbols, but a more fundamental issue: `symgo`'s inability to analyze the `minigo` package itself. This package, while part of the same workspace, is complex and uses language features that triggered deep, unhandled recursive loops in `symgo`'s evaluator.

The `identifier not found` errors for `goscan`, `token`, etc., were symptoms of this deeper failure. The analysis would enter an infinite loop before it even had a chance to correctly resolve all symbols.

## Test-Driven Debugging Journey

The strategy was to create a focused integration test to reproduce the `minigo` analysis failure in isolation. This proved to be a difficult task, fraught with environmental issues and incorrect assumptions.

### Iteration 1: Simple File Evaluation

*   **Action**: Create a test that iterates through all `.go` files in the `minigo` package and its sub-packages, calling `interp.Eval()` on each.
*   **Result**: The test passed almost instantly.
*   **Conclusion**: This was not enough to trigger the bug. The failure must be in the evaluation of function *bodies*, not just top-level declarations.

### Iteration 2: Full Function Application

*   **Action**: Revise the test to first load all declarations, then collect all `object.Function` instances from the `minigo` packages, and finally call `interp.ApplyFunction()` on each one.
*   **Result**: The test failed, but not with the expected recursion. It failed because the package objects for `minigo` were not found in the interpreter's state after the initial `Eval` pass.
*   **Conclusion**: The `Eval` function does not populate the interpreter's central package cache in the way that was assumed. Package resolution is lazy and happens on-demand when symbols are accessed.

### Iteration 3: Environment and Build System Hell

*   **Action**: A long series of attempts were made to work around the package resolution issue and fix the test. This involved:
    *   Trying to "prime" the interpreter by evaluating a dummy file that imported all `minigo` packages.
    *   Adding and re-adding test helper methods (`Files()`, `ApplyFunction()`, etc.) to the `symgo` and `evaluator` packages.
    *   Wrestling with a **major environmental issue** where `read_file`, `replace_with_git_merge_diff`, and `run_in_bash_session` would either fail with `file not found` or hang indefinitely.
*   **Result**: This led to a frustrating cycle of build errors, tool failures, and incorrect assumptions. The user provided a critical hint: check `AGENTS.md` and the current working directory (`pwd`).
*   **Conclusion**: The root cause of the tool failures was an unstable CWD. Following the advice in `AGENTS.md` to prefix commands with `cd /app` was a necessary workaround, though long-running `make` commands still tended to hang.

### Iteration 4: A Working, Failing Test

*   **Action**: After resetting the workspace and applying the `cd /app` workaround, a stable test was finally created. The final, successful approach was:
    1.  Create a `goscan.Scanner` manually for the project root.
    2.  Use the scanner to find and parse all packages under `minigo/...`.
    3.  Create a `symgo.Interpreter`.
    4.  "Load" all packages by calling `interp.Eval()` on each file's AST. This populates the necessary file scopes.
    5.  Iterate through the interpreter's *loaded files* (`interp.Files()`).
    6.  For each file belonging to a `minigo` package, iterate through its `*ast.FuncDecl`s.
    7.  For each `funcDecl`, create an `object.Function` and call `interp.ApplyFunction()` on it.
*   **Result**: This test successfully and reliably reproduced the bug, causing the test runner to time out.
*   **Conclusion**: This test-driven approach, despite the difficulties, resulted in a valuable regression test that precisely captures the bug.

## Final Status

The primary goal of creating a failing test case for the `minigo` analysis bug has been achieved. The test, `TestAnalyzeMinigoPackage`, now exists in the codebase. As per the user's instruction, the test is skipped using `t.Skip()` to allow the CI/CD pipeline to pass, with the understanding that the underlying bug will be fixed in a subsequent task. The knowledge gained about the unstable CWD and hanging `make` commands has been documented in `docs/trouble.md`.

## Resolution and Follow-up

The core infinite recursion bug was fixed by introducing a targeted cycle detection mechanism within the `symgo` evaluator's `evalCompositeLit` function. This resolves the timeout observed in the `TestAnalyzeMinigoPackage` integration test.

However, the task is only partially complete. A key follow-up action is to create a more focused, minimal unit test for this specific fix. An attempt to create such a test using invalid Go code (`var V = T{F: &V}`) revealed a separate robustness issue in the evaluator (a `nil pointer dereference` panic).

Therefore, the remaining high-priority task is to design a proper unit test—likely using valid but structurally complex Go code—that can trigger the original bug in a controlled manner, solidifying the fix and preventing future regressions. This task is now tracked in `TODO.md`.

## E2E Test Failure Analysis (Post-Refactor)

After the initial fixes, the `make -C examples/find-orphans e2e` command was run again to perform a full verification. This revealed a new, more subtle bug that was previously masked.

### Symptom: `identifier not found: findModuleRoot`

The e2e test failed, and the output log (`find-orphans.out`) was filled with errors like this:
```
level=ERROR msg="identifier not found: findModuleRoot" in_func=New in_func_pos=/app/goscan.go:454:16
...
level=ERROR msg="symbolic execution failed for entry point" function=github.com/podhmo/go-scan/examples/find-orphans.main error="symgo runtime error: identifier not found: findModuleRoot\n\t/app/locator/locator.go:78:18 ...
```

This error occurred during the symbolic execution of nearly every `main` package in the workspace. The stack trace consistently showed that the failure happened when `symgo` was evaluating `locator.New`, which in turn calls the unexported function `findModuleRoot` from the same `locator` package.

### Analysis: Incorrect Package Scoping

The problem is not that `symgo` cannot handle unexported functions. A targeted test case (`TestEval_CrossPackageUnexportedFunctionCall`) was created which proved that `symgo` *can* correctly resolve and call an unexported helper function in a different package, provided the packages are scanned and loaded correctly.

The root cause of the e2e failure is a scoping issue during on-demand package loading within `symgo`. When a function from a new package is encountered during symbolic execution (like `locator.New`), `symgo` loads that package. However, the environment (`object.Environment`) for this newly loaded package was being created incorrectly. Instead of being enclosed by the top-level, global environment (which contains built-ins), it was being enclosed by the current, potentially deeply nested, function execution environment.

This meant that when `locator.New` was evaluated, its environment did not contain the other top-level declarations from its own package, such as `findModuleRoot`.

### Blocked by Sandbox Environment

An attempt was made to fix this by modifying the `getOrLoadPackage` function in `symgo/evaluator/evaluator.go` to correctly find the top-level environment and enclose it. However, persistent and unresolvable issues with the agent's sandbox environment (e.g., `grep` failing to find existing text, `overwrite_file_with_block` corrupting files) made it impossible to apply the necessary code changes reliably. After multiple failed attempts using different strategies, the effort to fix the code had to be abandoned.

As per the user's direction, the goal was changed to simply document these findings. The underlying bug related to package environment creation remains in the codebase.

Commit message:

fix(symgo): correct package scoping for on-demand loading (#737)
This commit fixes a bug in the `symgo` evaluator where environments for packages loaded on-demand were not correctly enclosing the top-level universe scope. This resulted in "identifier not found" errors for built-in functions and types during the symbolic execution of these packages.

The fix involves two main changes:

1.  A `UniverseEnv` field has been added to the `Evaluator` struct. This environment is initialized with all the built-in objects from the global `universe`.
2.  The `getOrLoadPackage` function has been updated to use this `UniverseEnv` as the outer scope for any new package environments it creates.

Additionally, the fallback lookup to the global `universe` in `evalIdent` has been restored. This ensures that existing unit tests, which often create their own empty environments, continue to pass without needing a full refactoring.

These changes have been verified by running the `find-orphans` e2e test and the `symgo/evaluator` test suite, both of which now pass successfully.

Co-authored-by: google-labs-jules[bot] <161369871+google-labs-jules[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/trouble-symgo-refine2.md, after:

# `symgo` Refinement 2: Troubleshooting the Analysis of `minigo`

This document details the troubleshooting process for fixing the `symgo` analysis of the `minigo` package, as outlined in `plan-symgo-refine2.md`.

## Initial Analysis (Correction)

The initial problem analysis was flawed. The root cause of the `find-orphans` e2e test timeout was not just a failure to resolve standard library symbols, but a more fundamental issue: `symgo`'s inability to analyze the `minigo` package itself. This package, while part of the same workspace, is complex and uses language features that triggered deep, unhandled recursive loops in `symgo`'s evaluator.

The `identifier not found` errors for `goscan`, `token`, etc., were symptoms of this deeper failure. The analysis would enter an infinite loop before it even had a chance to correctly resolve all symbols.

## Test-Driven Debugging Journey

The strategy was to create a focused integration test to reproduce the `minigo` analysis failure in isolation. This proved to be a difficult task, fraught with environmental issues and incorrect assumptions.

### Iteration 1: Simple File Evaluation

*   **Action**: Create a test that iterates through all `.go` files in the `minigo` package and its sub-packages, calling `interp.Eval()` on each.
*   **Result**: The test passed almost instantly.
*   **Conclusion**: This was not enough to trigger the bug. The failure must be in the evaluation of function *bodies*, not just top-level declarations.

### Iteration 2: Full Function Application

*   **Action**: Revise the test to first load all declarations, then collect all `object.Function` instances from the `minigo` packages, and finally call `interp.ApplyFunction()` on each one.
*   **Result**: The test failed, but not with the expected recursion. It failed because the package objects for `minigo` were not found in the interpreter's state after the initial `Eval` pass.
*   **Conclusion**: The `Eval` function does not populate the interpreter's central package cache in the way that was assumed. Package resolution is lazy and happens on-demand when symbols are accessed.

### Iteration 3: Environment and Build System Hell

*   **Action**: A long series of attempts were made to work around the package resolution issue and fix the test. This involved:
    *   Trying to "prime" the interpreter by evaluating a dummy file that imported all `minigo` packages.
    *   Adding and re-adding test helper methods (`Files()`, `ApplyFunction()`, etc.) to the `symgo` and `evaluator` packages.
    *   Wrestling with a **major environmental issue** where `read_file`, `replace_with_git_merge_diff`, and `run_in_bash_session` would either fail with `file not found` or hang indefinitely.
*   **Result**: This led to a frustrating cycle of build errors, tool failures, and incorrect assumptions. The user provided a critical hint: check `AGENTS.md` and the current working directory (`pwd`).
*   **Conclusion**: The root cause of the tool failures was an unstable CWD. Following the advice in `AGENTS.md` to prefix commands with `cd /app` was a necessary workaround, though long-running `make` commands still tended to hang.

### Iteration 4: A Working, Failing Test

*   **Action**: After resetting the workspace and applying the `cd /app` workaround, a stable test was finally created. The final, successful approach was:
    1.  Create a `goscan.Scanner` manually for the project root.
    2.  Use the scanner to find and parse all packages under `minigo/...`.
    3.  Create a `symgo.Interpreter`.
    4.  "Load" all packages by calling `interp.Eval()` on each file's AST. This populates the necessary file scopes.
    5.  Iterate through the interpreter's *loaded files* (`interp.Files()`).
    6.  For each file belonging to a `minigo` package, iterate through its `*ast.FuncDecl`s.
    7.  For each `funcDecl`, create an `object.Function` and call `interp.ApplyFunction()` on it.
*   **Result**: This test successfully and reliably reproduced the bug, causing the test runner to time out.
*   **Conclusion**: This test-driven approach, despite the difficulties, resulted in a valuable regression test that precisely captures the bug.

## Final Status

The primary goal of creating a failing test case for the `minigo` analysis bug has been achieved. The test, `TestAnalyzeMinigoPackage`, now exists in the codebase. As per the user's instruction, the test is skipped using `t.Skip()` to allow the CI/CD pipeline to pass, with the understanding that the underlying bug will be fixed in a subsequent task. The knowledge gained about the unstable CWD and hanging `make` commands has been documented in `docs/trouble.md`.

## Resolution and Follow-up

The core infinite recursion bug was fixed by introducing a targeted cycle detection mechanism within the `symgo` evaluator's `evalCompositeLit` function. This resolves the timeout observed in the `TestAnalyzeMinigoPackage` integration test.

However, the task is only partially complete. A key follow-up action is to create a more focused, minimal unit test for this specific fix. An attempt to create such a test using invalid Go code (`var V = T{F: &V}`) revealed a separate robustness issue in the evaluator (a `nil pointer dereference` panic).

Therefore, the remaining high-priority task is to design a proper unit test—likely using valid but structurally complex Go code—that can trigger the original bug in a controlled manner, solidifying the fix and preventing future regressions. This task is now tracked in `TODO.md`.

## E2E Test Failure Analysis (Post-Refactor)

After the initial fixes, the `make -C examples/find-orphans e2e` command was run again to perform a full verification. This revealed a new, more subtle bug that was previously masked.

### Symptom: `identifier not found: findModuleRoot`

The e2e test failed, and the output log (`find-orphans.out`) was filled with errors like this:
```
level=ERROR msg="identifier not found: findModuleRoot" in_func=New in_func_pos=/app/goscan.go:454:16
...
level=ERROR msg="symbolic execution failed for entry point" function=github.com/podhmo/go-scan/examples/find-orphans.main error="symgo runtime error: identifier not found: findModuleRoot\n\t/app/locator/locator.go:78:18 ...
```

This error occurred during the symbolic execution of nearly every `main` package in the workspace. The stack trace consistently showed that the failure happened when `symgo` was evaluating `locator.New`, which in turn calls the unexported function `findModuleRoot` from the same `locator` package.

### Analysis: Incorrect Package Scoping

The problem is not that `symgo` cannot handle unexported functions. A targeted test case (`TestEval_CrossPackageUnexportedFunctionCall`) was created which proved that `symgo` *can* correctly resolve and call an unexported helper function in a different package, provided the packages are scanned and loaded correctly.

The root cause of the e2e failure is a scoping issue during on-demand package loading within `symgo`. When a function from a new package is encountered during symbolic execution (like `locator.New`), `symgo` loads that package. However, the environment (`object.Environment`) for this newly loaded package was being created incorrectly. Instead of being enclosed by the top-level, global environment (which contains built-ins), it was being enclosed by the current, potentially deeply nested, function execution environment.

This meant that when `locator.New` was evaluated, its environment did not contain the other top-level declarations from its own package, such as `findModuleRoot`.

### Resolution

The scoping issue was successfully resolved. The final fix involved a two-pronged approach:

1.  **Restoring Universe Fallback**: The initial attempt to fix the scoping by creating a `UniverseEnv` and removing the global fallback in `evalIdent` was too aggressive. It broke many existing unit tests that relied on the fallback for creating simple test environments. The global fallback in `evalIdent` was restored to ensure that all environments, regardless of their creation, could resolve built-in identifiers.
2.  **Correctly Chaining Package Environments**: The core of the bug was that the `getOrLoadPackage` function in `symgo/evaluator/evaluator.go` was creating new package environments with `object.NewEnvironment()`, which has no outer scope. This was corrected by:
    *   Adding a `UniverseEnv` field to the `Evaluator` struct, initialized with all built-in objects.
    *   Changing the `getOrLoadPackage` function to use `object.NewEnclosedEnvironment(e.UniverseEnv)`, ensuring every newly loaded package's environment is correctly chained to the shared universe of built-ins.

This dual approach fixed the original `identifier not found: findModuleRoot` error in the e2e tests while also maintaining the stability of the existing unit test suite. The `make -C examples/find-orphans e2e` command now passes without any scoping-related errors.
